#### Ideals and Factor Rings

##### Ideals

Suppose $R$ is a **nonzero ring** and $N \ltrieq R$. Then $N$ is an **ideal** if
$$
\forall a \in R: a N\subseteq N \land N a\subseteq N \quad
$$

We use a non-standard notation in these notes. Where $N$ is an ideal of $R$ is denoted as $N \sqsubseteq R$. We write $N \sqsubset R$ when $N \neq R$.

- There are two **trivial ideals**.
  - $\{0\}$ is the **zero ideal**.
  - $R$ is the **unit ideal**.

- If $N \sqsubseteq R$, $N$ is a subring of $R$.

- Note that $\ltrieq$ and $\sqsubseteq$ are both **not transitive**.

##### Generated ideal

Suppose $R$ is a **NC ring**. And $X \subseteq R$, define:
$$
(X) := \left\{\sum_{i=1}^n x_i r_i : n \in \N, x_i \in X, r_i \in R \right\}
$$

- An ideal generated by a **single** element is a **principal ideal**.
  - For $x \in R$, we define $(x): = (\c{x})$.
- Suppose $X  = \{x_1, \cdots, x_n\}$, denote $(X) = (x_1, \cdots, x_n)$.

##### Ideal operations

Suppose $R$ is a **nonzero ring**. And $I, J \sqsubseteq R$.

It is easy to prove the following by definition:

- $I + J \sqsubseteq R$.
- $I \cap J \sqsubseteq R$.
- $IJ \sqsubseteq R$. Note that $IJ \subseteq I \cap J$.

##### Divisibility

Suppose $\a{R, +, \cdot}$ is a **NC ring**. And $a, b \in R$.

We say "$a$ **divides** $b$", or "$a$ **is a factor of** $b$", and write $a \mid b$ if $\exists c \in R: a c = c a = b$.

- $\forall a \in R: a \mid 0$.
- $\forall a \in R:0 \mid a \implies a = 0$.
- $a \mid b \iff b \in (a) \iff (b) \subseteq (a)$.

Suppose $\a{R, +, \cdot}$ is a **NCU ring**. And $a, b \in R$.

When $a$ is a unit. Define division $b / a := b a^{-1}$.

Suppose $\a{R, +, \cdot}$ is an **integral domain**.

Then $(a) = (b) \iff a \mid b \land b \mid a \iff a\sim b$.

- Since $a = bc$ and $b = ad$ implies $a = a(dc)$.
- Therefore $dc = cd = 1$.

##### Factor ring

Suppose $\a{R, +, \cdot}$ is a ring. Suppose $H \sqsubseteq R$.

- Define $\times: R/H \times R/H \to R/H$ as $(a + H) \times (b + H) = ab + H$.
  - Multiplication $\times$ is well defined on $R / H$.
  
    - Suppose $a' = a + h$.
      
    - $(a'b) + H = (ab + hb) + H = ab + (hb + H) = ab + H$.
  
- Define $+: R/H \times R/H \to R/H$ as $(a + H) + (b + H) = (a + b) + H$.
  - Addition $+$ is well defined on $R / H$ since $\a{R/H, +}$ is a factor group.


$H \sqsubseteq R$ is necessary for $\times$ to be well defined.

- Suppose $\times$ is well defined on $R/H$.
  - For any $h \in H$, $(h + H) \times (a+H) = H = ha + H$.
  - Therefore $Ha \subseteq H$. Similarly we have $aH \subseteq H$.
- So $H \sqsubseteq R$.

$\a{R/H, +, \times}$ is a ring, called the **quotient / factor ring**.

- Since $H \ltrieq R$. $\langle R/H, + \rangle$ forms an abelian additive group.
- Multiplication is associative, and distributes over addition.

A factor ring of general rings can be either a domain, a field or a ring:

- Let $R = \Z \times \Z$ and $H = \c{(0, n): n \in \Z}$.
  - Clearly $H \sqsubset R$. And $R / H$ is isomorphic to $\Z$.
  - $R$ is ID, but $R / H$ is an ID.

- Let $R = \Z_6$, and $H = \c{0, 3}$.
  - Clearly $H \sqsubset R$. And $R / H$ is isomorphic to $\Z_3$.
  - $R$ is NCU ring, but $R/H$ is a field.

- Let $R = \Z$, and $H = 6\Z$.
  - Clearly $H \sqsubset R$. And $R/H$ is isomorphic to $\Z_6$.
  - $R$ is ID, but $R/H$ is NCU ring.

##### Ideals are kernels

Suppose $\a{R, +, \cdot}$ is a ring and $N \sqsubseteq R$.

Consider $\phi: x \mapsto x + N$.

- $\phi$ is a ring homomorphism. Since
  - $\phi(a) \phi(b) = \phi(ab)$.
  - $\phi(a + b) = \phi(a) + \phi(b)$.
- $\ker \phi = N$.


##### The fundamental theorem of ring homomorphisms

Suppose $\phi: R \to S$ is a ring homomorphism. $\ker \phi = N \sqsubseteq R$.

Define $\gamma: R \to R / N$ by $\gamma(x)  = x + N$.

Define $\mu: R / N \to \phi[R]$ by $\mu(x + N) = \phi(x)$. $\mu$ is a ring isomorphism.

- $\mu$ is a ring homomorphism:
  - $\mu((x + N) + (y + N)) = \phi(x + y) = \mu(x + N) + \mu(y + N)$.
  - $\mu(xy + N) = \phi(xy) = \mu(x + N)\mu(y + N)$.
- $\mu$ is clearly surjective.
- $\mu$ is injective:
  - Suppose $\mu(x + N) = \mu(y + N)$. Then $\phi(x) = \phi(y)$, so $(x - y) \in N$.
  - Therefore $x + N = y + N$, and $\mu$ is injective.

We obtained the **decomposition** $\phi(x) = \mu \circ \gamma(x)$.

##### Fibers of ring homomorphisms

Suppose $\phi: R \to S$ is a ring homomorphism. And $\ker \phi = N \sqsubseteq R$.

For $b \in \phi[R]$, $\phi^{-1}\c{b} \in R / N$.

- $\phi$ is also a group homomorphism with kernel $N$.
- The result follows the same result for group homomorphism.

##### Ideals and ring homomorphisms

Let $\phi: A \rightarrow B$ be a ring homomorphism. $H \le A$, and $G \le B$ are subrings.

- Kernels are ideals, $\ker \phi \sqsubseteq A$.
  - $\forall a\in A: a \ker \phi = \ker \phi = (\ker \phi) a$.
- Image of ideals are ideals. $N \sqsubseteq A \implies \phi[N] \sqsubseteq \phi[A]$.
  - $\forall a \in A: aN \subseteq N \supseteq Na \implies \forall \phi(a) \in \phi[A]: \phi(aN) = \phi(a) \phi[N] \subseteq \phi[N] \supseteq \phi[N]\phi(a)$.
  - Warning: $\phi[N]$ is an ideal of $\phi[A]$ but not $B$ in general.
    - Consider the identity map from $\mathbb Z \to \mathbb Q$. The ideal $2\mathbb Z$ in $\mathbb Z$ is not an ideal in $\mathbb Q$.
- Preimage of ideals are ideals. $M \sqsubseteq B \implies \phi^{-1}[M] \sqsubseteq \phi^{-1}[B]$.
  - By previous on the fibers of ring homomorphisms. There exists $Q, P \subseteq A$ such that:
    - $\phi^{-1} [M] = \cup \c{q + \ker \phi: q \in Q}$;
    - $\phi^{-1}[B] = \cup \c{p + \ker \phi: p \in P}$.
  - Consider any $k_1, k_2 \in \ker \phi$, $p \in P$, and $q \in Q$. We have $p + k_2 \in \phi^{-1}[B]$ and $q + k_1 \in \phi^{-1}[M]$.
    - $(q + k_1)(p + k_2) = qp + (qk_2 + k_1 p + k_1 k_2) = qp + k_3$.
    - $\phi(qp) = \phi(q) \phi(p) \in M$, so $qp \in \phi^{-1}[M]$.
    - Therefore $qp + k_3 \in \phi^{-1}[M]$.
