#### Symmetric Groups

##### Symmetric groups

$\sigma: A \to A$ that is bijective is a **permutation** of $A$.

A permutation $\sigma$ can be represented with the following notation:
$$
\sigma=\left(\begin{array}{lll}
\alpha & \beta & \cdots \\
\sigma(\alpha)& \sigma(\beta)&\cdots
\end{array}\right)
$$
$S_{A}$ Is the collection of all permutations of $A$. $S_{A}$ is a group under function composition.

- $|A| = |B| \implies S_A \simeq S_B$.
- Suppose $A = \c{0,1, \ldots, n - 1}$. Denote $S_n := S_A$. Note that $S_{n}$ has $n !$ elements.

##### Decompose permutations into cycles

Suppose $\sigma \in S_n$. Let $A = \c{0, 1, \ldots, n - 1}$.

- Define relationship $\sim$ on $A$. $i \sim j \iff \exists k \in \N: \sigma^k(i) = j$.
- Consider the equivalent classes $A = E_1 + E_2 + \cdots + E_k$. Where $|E_m| = N_m$.
- For $1 \le m \le k$, define permutation $c_m: A \to A$ as following:
  - For $a \in E_m$, $c_m(a) = \sigma(a)$.
  - For $a \notin E_m$, $c_m(a) = a$.
- $c_m: A \to A$ is called a **cycle** on $A$.
  - Let $a_0 \in E_m$ and $a_{t + 1} = \sigma(a_t)$ for $t \ge 0$.
  - $c_m$ can be represented with tuple $(a_0, \ldots, a_{N_m - 1})$. Since $c_m(a_0) = a_1$, $c_m(a_1) = a_2$, and so on...


Clearly $\sigma = c_1 \circ c_2\circ \cdots \circ c_k$. We can decompose any permutation in $S_n$ into composition of cycles.

- Disjoint cycles on different equivalent classes can **commute**.

##### Example: Group $S_3$

We give the table for $S_3$. $|S_3| = 6$. All elements are cycles.
$$
\begin{array}{c|cccccc}
\circ & \iota & (0,1,2) & (0,2,1) & (0,1) & (0,2) & (1,2) \\
\hline \iota & \iota & (0,1,2) & (0,2,1) & (0,1) & (0,2) & (1,2) \\
(0,1,2) & (0,1,2) & (0,2,1) & \iota & (0,2) & (1,2) & (0,1) \\
(0,2,1) & (0,2,1) & \iota & (0,1,2) & (1,2) & (0,1) & (0,2) \\
(0,1) & (0,1) & (1,2) & (0,2) & \iota & (0,2,1) & (0,1,2) \\
(0,2) & (0,2) & (0,1) & (1,2) & (0,1,2) & \iota & (0,2,1) \\
(1,2) & (1,2) & (0,2) & (0,1) & (0,2,1) & (0,1,2) & \iota
\end{array}
$$
All groups below order 6 are abelian. Thus $S_{3}$ is the smallest group which is not abelian.

- Since $S_3$ is a subgroup (in isomorphic sense) of $S_n, n \ge 3$, they are all non-abelian.

(**Example: Dihedral group** $D_{n}$)

Define **reflection** $\mu \in S_n$ as $\mu(i) := (n - 1) - i$.

Define **rotation** $\rho \in S_n$ as $\rho(i) := i + 1 \bmod n$.

Dihedral group is generated by the two operations: $D_n := \a{\mu, \rho} \le S_n$.

It is not hard to see that $|D_n| = 2n$ and
$$
D_{n}=\left\{\iota, \rho, \rho^{2}, \rho^{3}, \cdots, \rho^{n-1}, \mu, \mu \rho, \mu \rho^{2}, \mu \rho^{3}, \cdots, \mu \rho^{n-1}\right\}
$$

- $\mu^s \rho^t$ is called the standard form of $\sigma \in D_n$. Where $s \in \c{0, 1}$, and $0\le t < n$.

##### Cayley's theorem

Let $\a{G, \cdot}$ be a group. It is isomorphic to a subgroup of $S_G$.

- For $g \in G$ defined permutation $\ell_g: G \to G$ as $x \mapsto gx$.
- Define map $\phi: G \to S_G$ as $g \mapsto \ell_g$.
- $\phi$ is an injective homomorphism. So $G \simeq \phi[G] \le S_G$.
  - $\phi(xy) = \ell_{xy} = \ell_x\circ\ell_y= \phi(x) \circ \phi(y)$.
  - $\phi(x) = \phi(y) \implies \forall g \in G :xg = yg \implies x = y$.

##### Decompose cycles into transpositions

A cycle of form $(a, b)$ for $a \neq b$ is called a **transposition**.

Given cycle $(a_0, a_1, \ldots, a_{n - 1})$ in $S_A$, it can be written as a composition of transpositions:
$$
\p{a_{0}, a_{1}, \cdots, a_{n - 1}}=\p{a_{0}, a_{n-1}}\p{a_0, a_{n -2}} \cdots (a_0, a_{1})
$$

##### Sign of permutations in $S_n$

A permutation $\sigma \in S_n$ is **odd** if it is the composition of an odd number of transpositions. Otherwise it is called **even**.

Consider sequence $a_k = \sigma(k)$ for $0 \le k < n$. The **inversion number** of $\sigma \in S_n$ is defined as following:
$$
I(\sigma) := \#\c{a_i > a_j: 0 \le i < j < n} \in \N
$$
$\sigma$ is odd if and only if $I(\sigma)$ is odd.

- Since compositing with a transposition changes $I(\sigma)$ by an odd integer.

Define the **sign** function $\sgn: S_n \to \c{1, -1}$ as $\sgn(\sigma) := (-1)^{I(\sigma)}$.
