#### Product Measure Space

(**Product of $\sigma$-algebras**)

Suppose $(X_\alpha, \M_\alpha)_{\alpha \in A}$ are measurable spaces. Define $X = \times_{\alpha \in A}X_\alpha$. Suppose $\pi_\alpha$ are the coordinate maps.

Define $\otimes_{\alpha} \M _{\alpha} := \sigma\{\pi_{\alpha}^{-1}(E_{\alpha}): E_{\alpha} \in \M _{\alpha}, \alpha \in A\}$ on $X$.

- Equivalently $\otimes_\alpha \M_\alpha: = \sigma(\pi_\alpha)_{\alpha \in A}$. See ($\sigma$-algebra generated by functions).
- Suppose $\M_\alpha = \sigma(\E_\alpha)$. Then $\otimes_\alpha \M_\alpha = \sigma\{\pi_{\alpha}^{-1}(E_{\alpha}): E_{\alpha} \in \E_{\alpha}, \alpha \in A\}$.

When $A$ is countable: $\otimes_\alpha \M_\alpha = \sigma\{\times_\alpha E_\alpha: E_\alpha \in \M_\alpha\}$.

- Suppose $\M_\alpha = \sigma(\E_\alpha)$. Then $\otimes_\alpha \M_\alpha = \sigma\{\times_{\alpha} E_{\alpha}: E_{\alpha} \in \E_{\alpha}\}$.

(**Finite product of measures**)

Suppose $(X_\alpha, \M_\alpha, \mu_\alpha)_{\alpha \in A}$ are **$\sigma$-finite** measure spaces, $A$ is **finite**.

Define $\S := \{\times_\alpha E_\alpha: E_\alpha \in \M_\alpha\}$.

- $\S$ is a semi-algebra, called the **semi-algebra of rectangles**.

Define $X = \times_\alpha X_\alpha$, $\M = \otimes_\alpha \M_\alpha = \sigma(\S)$.

Define $\mu$ on $\S$ by $\mu(\times_\alpha E_\alpha) := \times_\alpha \mu_\alpha(E_\alpha)$. Then $\mu$ is a $\sigma$-finite measure on $\S$.

- $\mu$ is a proto-measure.
- $\mu$ is $\sigma$-finite on $\S$.
- $\mu$ is countably additive. (Proof based on unsigned integration.)
  - Suppose $A, (B_i)_{i = 1}^\infty \in \S$. And $A = +_i B_i$. Where $B_{i} = \times_\alpha B_{i, \alpha}$.
  - Then $1_{A}(x_1, \cdots, x_n) = \sum_{i = 1}^\infty 1_{B_i}(x_1, \cdots, x_n) = \sum_i \prod_{\alpha}1_{B_{i, \alpha}}(x_1, \cdots, x_n)$.
  - **Integrate** over $x_1, \cdots, x_n$ iteratively gives the result.

So $\mu^*$ is the unique extension of $\mu$ from $\S$ to $\M = \sigma(\S)$.

$(X, \M, \mu^*)$ is the **unique product measure space**.

#### Borel Sets

(**Multi-index notation**)

Suppose $a, b \in \eR^d$.

- $a < b := \forall i: a_i < b_i$.
- $(a, b) := \times_i (a_i, b_i)$. Other intervals works similarly.

(**Borel algebra**)

Suppose $(X, G)$ is a topological space where $G$ is the set of all open sets in $X$.

$\sigma(G)$ is called the Borel $\sigma$-algebra on $X$ denoted as $\B(X)$.

The members of $\B(X)$ are **Borel sets**, and are called **Borel measurable**.

(**Borel algebra on $\R^n$**)

Consider the Euclidean space with Euclidean topology $(\R^n, G)$.

Many generators exists for the Borel algebra:

- All open sets, or all closed sets.
- All open balls, or all bounded open sets.
- $\c{(a, b): a, b \in \Q^n}$, where $(a, b)$ can be replaced with $[a, b)$, $(a, b]$, $[a, b]$.
- $\c{(-\infty, a): a \in \Q^n}$, where $(-\infty, a)$ can be replaced with $(-\infty, a]$, $(a, \infty)$, $[a, \infty)$.

Clearly $\B(\R^n) = \otimes_{i = 1}^n \B(\R)$.

- LHS contains the generator of RHS, and vice versa.

Clearly $\B(\R^m) \otimes \B(\R^n) \simeq \B(\R^{m + n})$.

- $\simeq$ due to our identification of $\R^m \times \R^n$ and $\R^{m + n}$.
- LHS contains the generator of RHS, and vice versa.

(**Product of Lebesgue measure**)

Denote $\B_n = \B(\R^n)$, and $\mathbb L_n = \L(\R^n)$. Let $\lambda_n$ be the Lebesgue measure on $\R^n$.

$(\R^n \times \R^m, \B_m \otimes \B_n, \lambda_m \times \lambda_n)$ is isomorphic to $(\R^{m + n}, \B_{m + n}, \lambda_{m + n})$.

However $\B_m \otimes \B_n \subset \L_m \times \L_n \subset \L_{m + n}$. ==TODO==

