#### Groups

##### Groups

Suppose $G$ is a set, and $*: G \times G \to G$. Then $\langle G, *\rangle$ is a **group** if

- $\forall x, y, z \in G : x *(y*z) = (x*y) *z$.
- $\exists u \in G\left [(\forall x \in G:x*u = u*x = x) \land (\forall x \in G, \exist y \in G :x*y = y*x = u)\right]$.

We have following immediate consequences of this definition:

- The identity $u$ is unique. $e_1 x = x e_1 = x = e_2 x = x e_2 \implies e_1 = e_2$.
- The inverse $y$ of $x$ is unique. $yx = xy  = e = zx = xz \implies y =z$.
- Left and right cancellation works. $\forall x, y, z \in G: xy = xz \implies y = z$.

$G$ is called **abelian** if $*$ is commutative. $o(G) = |G|$ is the **order** of group $G$.

##### Multiplicative notation of groups

Suppose $\a{G, *}$ is a group. Let $a, b \in G$ and $n, m, k \in \N$.

We often write $*$ as multiplication $\cdot$ and adopt the following **multiplicative notation**:

- $a^0 := 1$ is the identity element.
- $a^{-1}$ is the inverse of $a$.
- $ab := a \cdot b$.
- $a^k := a a^{k - 1}$ for $k \ge 1$.
- $a^{-k} := (a^k)^{-1}$.
- $a^{n + m} := a^n a^m$.
- $(a^n)^m = a^{nm}$.

##### Additive notation of groups

Suppose $\a{G, *}$ is a group. Let $a, b \in G$ and $n, m, k \in \N$.

When $G$ is **abelian**, we often write $*$ as addition $+$, and adopt the following **additive notation**:

- $k a := \sum_{i=1}^k a$.
- $0 a := 0$.
- $-a$ is the inverse of $a$.
- $(-k)a := -(ka)$.
- $(n + m) a := na + ma$.
- $n(m a) = (nm) a$.

##### Example: Group of integers modulo $n$

Define $\Z_n := \c{0, 1, \ldots, n - 1}$. Define addition modulus $n$ as $a +_n b := (a + b) \bmod n$.

Then $\a{\Z_n, +_n}$ is an abelian group.

##### Example: Group of $n$-th roots of unity over $\C$

Define $U_n: = \c{z \in \C \mid z^n = 1}$. $U_n$ is the set of $n$-th roots of unity.
$$
U_n = \c{e^{2\pi i k / n} \mid k = 0, 1, \ldots, n - 1}
$$
Then $\a{U_n, \cdot}$ is an abelian group.

#### Subgroups

##### Subgroup

Suppose $\a{G, \cdot}$ is a group.

Suppose $H \subseteq G$, if $H$ is a group with $\cdot|_{H^2}$, then $H$ is a subgroup of $G$, denoted by $H \le G$.

- $H \subset G$ then $H < G$, called a **proper subgroup**.
  - $G$ is called the improper subgroup of $G$.
  - $\{1\}$ is called the trivial subgroup.
- A group is abelian if and only if all of its subgroups are abelian.

##### Subgroup tests

Suppose $\a{G, \cdot}$ is a group. For $\varnothing \subset H \subseteq G$, we have following tests for $H \le G$:

- $H \le G$ if $H$ is closed under group operation and inverse.
- $H \le G$ if $\forall a, b \in H: ab^{-1} \in H$.
- Suppose $H$ is finite. $H \le G$ if $H$ is closed under group operation.
  - Suppose $a \in H$, then $\langle a \rangle \subseteq H$. So $a^{-1} \in H$.
- $H \le G$ if $H$ is the intersection of subgroups of $G$.

##### Binary operations on subsets

Suppose $G$ is a set where there is a binary operation $\cdot(x, y)$ defined on it.

Suppose $H, K \subseteq G$ and $a \in G$. We generalize the operation as following:

- Define $H\cdot K  := \{h \cdot k \mid h \in H \text { and } k \in K\}$.
- Define $a\cdot H := \c{a \cdot h \mid h \in H} \le G$ and $H\cdot a: = \c{h\cdot a \mid h \in H} \le G$.

We have following comments:

- We can omit the symbol $\cdot$ when using the multiplicative notation.
- The generalized operation is associative. e.g. $(aH) K = a(HK)$.

#### Cyclic Groups

##### Generated subgroup

Suppose $\a{G, \cdot}$ is a group and $A \subseteq G$.

Define the **subgroup** generated by $A$ as
$$
\langle A \rangle := \left \{ 
a_0a_1a_2 \cdots \in A^\N: \exists N, \forall n > N: a_n = 1
\right \}
$$

- When $A$ is finite, $\a{A}$ is called finitely generated.
- When elements in $A$ commutes, $\a{A}$ is abelian.

##### Cyclic subgroup

Let $\a{G, \cdot}$ be a group and let $a \in G$. Then $\a{a} =\c{a^{n} \mid n \in \Z}$.

- $\a{a}$ is the **smallest** subgroup of $G$ that contains $a$.
- $\langle a \rangle$ is called the cyclic subgroup of $G$ **generated** by $a$.
- $a$ is called the **generator** of this group.
- $|\langle a \rangle| = o(a)$ is the **order** of element $a$.
- A group $G$ is **cyclic** if there is some element $a$ in $G$ that generates $G$.

##### Division Algorithm on $\mathbb Z$ ==TODO==

For all $n \in \Z$ and $m \in \Z^+$, there exists unique $q, r \in \Z$ such that
$$
n = q \cdot m + r,\quad 0 \le r < m
$$

- $q$ is called the **quotient** of $n$ divided by $m$.
- $r$ is called the **remainder** of $n$ divided by $m$.

##### Subgroups of a cyclic group are cyclic

Suppose $G = \langle a \rangle$ and $H \le G$. Then $H$ is cyclic.

If $H=\{e\}$, then $H=\langle e\rangle$ is cyclic.

Otherwise $H \neq\{e\},$ then $a^{n} \in H$ for some $n \in \mathbb{Z}^{+}$.

- Define $m := \min \{n \in \N^+: a^n \in H\}$.
- Suppose $b = a^n \in H$. By division $n = qm + r$ where $0 \le r < m$.
- So $(a^{m})^qa^r \in H$ and $a^r \in H$. So $r$ must be zero.
- Therefore all $b \in H$ must be of the form $a^{mq}, q \in \Z$. $H = \langle a^m \rangle$.

##### GCD and LCM in $\Z$

Consider any $r, s \in \Z$.

Consider cyclic subgroup $U = \c{nr + ms \mid n, m \in \Z} \le \Z$.

- Suppose $U = \a{d}$, where $d \ge 0$.

- Since $d \mid r$ and $d\mid s$, and $d$ divides all other common divisors, $d = \gcd(r, s)$.

Consider cyclic subgroup $V = r \mathbb Z \cap s\mathbb Z \le \Z$.

- $V \le \Z$ is cyclic. Suppose $V = m\Z$, where $m \ge 0$.
- $V$ contains all common multiples of $a$ and $b$. So $m = \lcm(r, s)$.

Also recall that $|rs| = \lcm(r, s)  \gcd(r, s)$.

##### Orders of elements in finite cyclic groups

Suppose $G = \langle a \rangle$ is a **finite cyclic group** of order $n \ge 1$.

Then $o(a^s) = n / \gcd(n, s)$ for $s \in \Z$. Since
$$
(a^s)^d = 1 \implies n | sd \implies \lcm(n, s) \mid sd \implies \frac{\lcm(n, s)}{s} \mid d \implies \frac{n}{\gcd(n, s)} \mid d
$$
$\gcd(s, n) = \gcd(t, n) \implies \a{a^s} = \a{a^t}$.

- Let $d = \gcd(s, n) = \gcd(t, n)$.
- There exists $p, q \in \Z$ where $ps + qn = d$. So $a^{ps + qn} = a^d \implies a^d \in \a{a^s}$. Also $a^d \in \a{a^t}$.
- Note that $o(a^d) = n / d$. So $\langle a^s \rangle = \langle a^t \rangle = \langle a^d \rangle$.

The structure of $G$ is now clear, for $d \ge 1$ and $d \mid n$, $\a{a^d}$ is the only subgroup of order $n / d$.

#### Group Homomorphisms

##### Group homomorphisms

Let $\a{G, \cdot}$ and $\a{H,\cdot}$ be groups and $f: G \to H$. We say that $f$ is a group **homomorphism** if
$$
\forall a, b \in G: f(ab) = f(a) f(b)
$$

- If $f$ is **bijective**, $f$ is called an group **isomorphism**.
  - And $G$ is said to be isomorphic to $H$. Denoted as $G \simeq H$.
  - $G$ is abelian implies $H$ is abelian.
    - Since $f(a)f(b) = f(ab) = f(ba) = f(b)f(a)$.
  - $f^{-1}: H \to G$ is a group isomorphism.
    - $\forall a, b \in G: f^{-1}(f(a) f(b)) = ab = f^{-1}(f(a)) f^{-1}(f(b))$.
- If $G = H$, $f$ is called an group **automorphism**.
- The **kernel** of $f$ is the set $f^{-1}[\c{1_{H}}] \le G$.

##### Group homomorphisms and generated groups

Let $\a{G, \cdot}$ and $\a{H,\cdot}$ be groups and $f: G \to H$ is a group homomorphism.

- If $G = \a{A}$, $f$ is completely determined by $f|_A$. And $f[G] = \a{f[A]}$.
- If $G = \a{a}$, $f$ is completely determined by $f(a)$. And $f[\a{a}] = \a{f(a)}$.
  - If $o(G) = \infty$, consider $f: a^k \mapsto k$. So $G \simeq \a{\Z, +}$.
  - If $o(G) = n < \infty$, consider $f: a^k \mapsto k \bmod n$. So $G \simeq \a{\Z_n, +}$.


##### Properties of group homomorphisms

Suppose $\phi: A \to B$ is a group homomorphism. $H \le A$ and $G \le B$.

- Power law $\forall n \in \Z: \phi(a^n) = \phi(a)^n$.
  - Identity is mapped to identity. $\phi(xe) = \phi(x) \phi(e) = \phi(e) \phi(x)$.
  - Inverse is mapped to inverse. $\phi(xy) = \phi(e) = \phi(x) \phi(y) = \phi(y) \phi(x)$.
  - Also note that $\phi(a^n) = \phi(a a^{n - 1}) = \phi(a) \phi(a)^{n - 1}$.
- Image of subgroups are subgroups. $H \le A \implies \phi[H] \le \phi[A]$.
  - $\phi[H]$ is closed under group operation since $\phi(x)\phi(y) = \phi(xy)$.
  - $\phi[H]$ is closed under group inversion since $\phi(x^{-1}) = \phi(x)^{-1}$.
- Pre-image of subgroups are subgroups. $G \le B \implies \phi^{-1}[G] \le \phi^{-1}[B]$.
  - $\phi(e) = e \implies e \in \phi^{-1}[G]$.
  - $a, b \in \phi^{-1}[G] \implies \phi(a) \phi(b) = \phi(ab) \in G \implies ab \in \phi^{-1}[G]$.
  - $a \in \phi^{-1}[G] \implies \phi(a)^{-1} \in G \implies \phi(a^{-1}) \in G \implies a^{-1} \in \phi^{-1}[G]$.
- $\phi$ is injective iff $\ker \phi = \{e\}$.
  - Injection implies only $\phi(e) = e$.
  - $\phi(a) = \phi(b) \implies \phi(ab^{-1}) = e \implies a = b$.

